.\" this file uses GNU groff tmac.an macros
.\"
.TH ATPDIAG 1 "28 November 1995" "ATPDIAG 0.92" "ATP QWK Mail/News Reader"

.SH NAME
atpdiag \- checks atp qwk reader configuration.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B 
atpdiag
.RB " [ " -h " | " -v " | " --help " | " --version  " ] " 

.SH DESCRIPTION
A diagnostic script written in 
.BR Perl , 
useful during installation of ATP QWK news/mail reader, and for
diagnosing possible configuration problems.  When started,
.B atpdiag 
looks for the environment variable
.ft CW
ATP\c
.ft R
\&\.
then searches for the configuration file 
.IR atprc .
If that file can be successfully opened, 
.B atpdiag
parses it, checking specified paths and support programs for existence
and accessibility. Informational, warning, and error messages are
displayed. 

.PP
Perhaps the most common ATP installation error is the failure to 
.I set and export 
the
.ft CW
ATP 
.ft R
environment variable.  Normally this should be done in the user's shell
startup file such as the
.I \ .profile 
in the user's home directory.  ATP expects the environment variable 
.ft CW 
ATP 
.ft R
to point to the directory where ATP will keep its 
.I atprc 
configuration file, 
.I taglines.atp 
tagline file, and message bases. 

.PP
Another possible ATP configuration problem occurs when using Info-Zip
UnZip 5.11 and later. These recent versions of UnZip require the -L flag
when un-zipping certain qwk packets originating in the MSDOS world.
Previous to UnZip 5.11, the default behavior for UnZip was to translate
MSDOS file names to lower case on unzipping. Now you must request lower
case translation explicitly by adding the -L flag to your unzip command
in your
.IR atprc .
This may also be accomplished by setting and exporting the 
.ft CW
UNZIP
.ft R
environment variable.

When run,
.B atpdiag
will attempt to detect your UnZip version and report if the configuration
appears wrong. 

.SH FILES
.I /usr/local/bin/atpdiag
.br
.I $ATP/taglines.atp
.br
.I $ATP/atprc

.SH
SEE ALSO
.BR atp (1),
.BR perl (1), 
.BR unzip (1)
